readme.md, before:

<TextEditorTest> — A Go CLI Text Editor

A tiny nano-like editor that can grow toward Emacs

Goal: Start with a reliable, minimalist, cross-platform terminal editor (nano clone), then expand toward Emacs-style power via a contextual command menu and a plug-in system.

Parallelization Plan
--------------------
To keep the editor responsive as features grow, we will split work between a
single sequential core and multiple background goroutines.

Sequential core (single goroutine)
- Maintains the edit log and undo/redo history in order.
- Owns cursor position and selection state.
- Applies all edits and command dispatch so changes occur deterministically.

Concurrent subsystems (worker goroutines)
- Rendering, file I/O, search/indexing, plug‑in host, and other background
  analysis.
- Workers communicate with the core through typed channels and operate on
  snapshots of editor state. They never mutate core state directly.

Integration guidelines
- Offload long‑running tasks to workers and report results back as commands.
- Keep data structures copy‑on‑write or immutable when shared across threads.
- Log every edit through the sequential core to preserve ordering for future
  replay or collaboration features.

This approach lets most of the application run in parallel while guaranteeing
that the edit history and cursor/selection remain consistent.

⸻

0) Quick Start (for the coding agent)
	•	Language: Go 1.22+
	•	Terminal UI: Prefer tcell (github.com/gdamore/tcell/v2) for cross-platform input/rendering.
	•	Build:

go build ./cmd/<project>


	•	Run:

./<project> [path/to/file]


	•	Test:

go test ./...



⸻

Example: Build & basic usage

Build the editor binary from the repository root:

    go build ./cmd/texteditor

This produces a binary named `texteditor` in the working directory. Run it with an optional file path:

    ./texteditor [path/to/file]

Interactive example (typical session):

- Open a file:

    ./texteditor README.md

 - Move the cursor with the arrow keys (or Ctrl+B/F/P/N), PageUp/PageDown, Home/End.
- Search (incremental): press Ctrl+W, type a query — matches are highlighted in the viewport as you type; press Enter to jump to the current match, Esc to cancel.
- Go to line: press Alt+G, enter a 1-based line number, press Enter to jump.
- Save changes: press Ctrl+S.
- Quit: press Ctrl+Q (the editor will prompt if the buffer is dirty in future milestones).

Notes:
- Search highlights and go-to behavior are implemented in M3. Highlight styles use a high-contrast background for visibility; theming and color configuration come later (M5).

⸻

1) Project Phases & Milestones

We’ll ship in small, testable increments. Each milestone has acceptance criteria.

M0 — Scaffold & Event Loop
	•	Create module, folders (see Structure).
	•	Initialize terminal (raw mode), main loop, clean shutdown on Ctrl+Q.
	•	Render a static screen and status bar; show current file name or [No File].
Done when: App starts, draws a status bar, exits cleanly on Ctrl+Q; unit test covers event loop tick handler.

M1 — Open/Display & Basic Navigation (nano parity, read-only)
	•	Load small/medium files into a text buffer.
	•	Display with scrolling; handle cursor movement: arrows, PageUp/Down, Home/End.
	•	Status line shows: filename, cursor line:col, modification flag.
Done when: Can open a file and navigate end-to-end without editing; tests cover file load and viewport math.

M2 — Editing Core (insert, delete, newlines)
	•	Implement TextStorage interface and start with a gap buffer (simple and fast enough).
	•	Insert characters, Backspace/Delete, Enter (LF newlines).
	•	Mark buffer “dirty”; enable Ctrl+S to save.
Done when: Can edit text, save to disk, reopen and see changes; tests cover insert/delete correctness.

M3 — Search (incremental) & Go-to
	•	Ctrl+W: incremental search UI with highlights; Enter to jump; Esc to cancel.
	•	Ctrl+_ (or Alt+G): go-to line.
Done when: Search works across file; tests cover search index and wrap-around.

M4 — Clipboard-like actions (line kill/yank) & Undo/Redo v1
		•	Ctrl+K: cut to end of line to an internal kill ring (single slot is fine for v1).
		•	Ctrl+U/Ctrl+Y: paste line.
		•	p: paste from the kill ring in normal mode.
		•	Ctrl+Z/Ctrl+Y: undo/redo using a simple history stack.
Done when: Basic cut/paste and undo/redo function with tests on edit history.

M5 — Config & Keymaps
	•	Read ~/.<project>/config.(yaml|toml) for settings: theme, keybindings.
	•	Keymap system maps sequences to commands.
Done when: Users can remap a key (e.g., save); tests on key resolution.

M6 — Multiple Buffers & Simple Windowing
	•	Open multiple files in memory; switch buffers; optional horizontal/vertical split (one level).
Done when: Open two files and flip focus; tests assert buffer focus and rendering state.

M7 — Contextual Command Menu (foundation for “M-x” feel)
	•	Key: F2 (or Alt+X) opens a popup “command palette”.
	•	Filter by fuzzy match; show context-valid commands (see Context Model).
Done when: Core commands appear, are filterable, and execute; tests cover menu filtering.

M8 — Plug-in API v0 (external process, JSON-RPC over stdio)
	•	Define minimal RPC: Register, ListCommands, Execute.
	•	Provide editor capabilities via Context: buffer text slice, selection, cursor, file path, filetype.
	•	Ship one reference plug-in (e.g., word count) in Go or Python.
Done when: Plugin registers commands visible in the contextual menu and can mutate the buffer via RPC; end-to-end test with a sample plug-in.

M9 — Quality Pass & Large Files
	•	Swap gapbuffer behind TextStorage with a piece table implementation (flag-gated).
	•	Add basic performance tests with a ~5–20MB file.
Done when: Large files remain responsive within reasonable limits (document thresholds in README).

⸻

2) Non-Goals (early)
	•	Full Emacs parity (modes, elisp) — out of scope early.
	•	Mouse support — optional later.
	•	Binary diff/merge tools — later.
	•	Windows console “legacy mode” quirks — best effort; keep tcell default paths.

⸻

3) Architecture Overview

Core Packages (proposed)

cmd/<project>/        # main entry
internal/app/         # bootstrap, DI wiring (internal vis)
pkg/editor/           # Editor orchestrator, lifecycle
pkg/buffer/           # TextStorage interface + gapbuffer, piecetable
pkg/view/             # Viewport, status bar, popups
pkg/input/            # Key handling, keymap, chords
pkg/render/           # Drawing via tcell
pkg/files/            # I/O, encodings, line endings
pkg/search/           # Incremental search
pkg/history/          # Undo/Redo
pkg/config/           # Config load/validate
pkg/commands/         # Built-in commands
pkg/menu/             # Contextual command menu
pkg/plugins/          # Plugin manager, JSON-RPC transport, capability guards

Key Data Structures
	•	Editor: holds Buffers, focused Window, Keymap, Config, PluginManager.
	•	Buffer: wraps TextStorage, Cursor, Selection, Dirty flag, FilePath, FileType.
	•	TextStorage (interface):

type TextStorage interface {
    Insert(pos int, s []rune) error
    Delete(start, end int) error
    Slice(start, end int) []rune
    Len() int
    LineAt(idx int) (start, end int)
}


	•	Context (passed to commands/plugins):

type Context struct {
    BufferID   string
    FilePath   string
    FileType   string
    Cursor     Position
    Selection  *Range // nil if none
    ReadOnly   bool
    // Editor services (capability-limited in plugins):
    GetText(start, end int) (string, error)
    Replace(start, end int, with string) error
    Insert(pos int, s string) error
    Message(msg string)
}



Command Model
	•	Commands are functions with signature:
func(ctx *Context, args map[string]any) error
	•	Registered in a catalog with:
	•	Name (id), Title (for UI), When predicate (context applicability), Category, DefaultKeybinds.

⸻

4) Contextual Command Menu (v1)
	•	Trigger: F2 (or Alt+X).
	•	Shows a list of applicable commands from Core + Plugins.
	•	Input supports fuzzy filtering; Enter executes selected command.
	•	Context passed includes FileType (to enable language-aware commands), Selection, Cursor.
	•	UI: popup panel centered; help line shows keybinding for selected item.

Extension later: categories/tabs, preview pane, and per-mode menus.

⸻

5) Plug-in System (Path to Power)

Design Choice

Use out-of-process plugins communicating via JSON-RPC 2.0 over stdio (or pipes).
Why:
	•	Portable across platforms and architectures.
	•	Safer: crash/isolate; no Go plugin ABI issues.
	•	Language-agnostic; authors can use Go/Python/Rust/…

Transport
	•	Editor spawns plugin executable listed in config.
	•	Handshake:
	•	Editor → Plugin: Register (editor version, capabilities).
	•	Plugin → Editor: declares commands[] with metadata.
	•	Runtime:
	•	Editor → Plugin: Execute with Context and args.
	•	Plugin → Editor: ApplyEdits / PostMessage via RPC callbacks.

Minimal RPC (v0)

// Editor -> Plugin
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"Register", "params":{"editorVersion":"0.1.0"}, "id":1 }
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"ListCommands", "id":2 }
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"Execute",
  "params":{"name":"word.count","context":{...},"args":{}}, "id":3 }

// Plugin -> Editor (callback)
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"ApplyEdits",
  "params":{"bufferId":"...","edits":[{"start":10,"end":20,"text":"X"}]} }
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"PostMessage", "params":{"text":"Done."} }

Security & Sandboxing (initial stance)
	•	Default deny: plugins cannot read files or environment via the editor.
	•	Editor exposes only text operations and messages by default.
	•	Opt-in capabilities later (e.g., filesystem, spawn processes) via config flags.

Reference Plugin (for milestone M8)
	•	wordcount (read-only), then toggle-comment (mutating) for Go/JSON.

⸻

6) Keybindings (nano-like defaults)
		•	Ctrl+Q: Quit (prompt if dirty)
		•	Ctrl+S: Save
		•	Ctrl+O: Open file (prompt)
		•	Ctrl+W: Search (incremental)
		•	Ctrl+K: Cut to end of line
		•	Ctrl+U/Ctrl+Y: Paste (yank)
		•	Ctrl+Z / Ctrl+Y: Undo / Redo
		•	Ctrl+A/Ctrl+E: Line start/end (insert)
		•	F2: Contextual Command Menu
(Remappable in config at M5.)

⸻

7) Config

File: ~/.<project>/config.yaml (or local .editorconfig.yaml in project root)

theme: "default"
keymap:
  "Ctrl+Q": "editor.quit"
  "Ctrl+S": "file.save"
  "F2":     "menu.context"
plugins:
  - path: "/usr/local/bin/<project>-wordcount"
    enabled: true
    capabilities: ["read"]


⸻

8) File Handling
	•	Default newline: \n (preserve existing when possible).
	•	UTF-8 only v1; detect BOM and drop on write unless present on read.
	•	Large files: start with in-memory; document practical limits; add piece table in M9.

⸻

9) Building Blocks & Decisions
	•	Terminal lib: tcell for input/render; fall back plan: termbox if needed.
	•	Text storage: Start gap buffer behind TextStorage; plan swap to piece table.
	•	Search: naive forward scan with highlights; optimize later with indexes.
	•	Undo/Redo: command log with coalescing for typed runs; cap history size.

⸻

10) Directory Structure (initial)

.
├── cmd/<project>/main.go
├── pkg/
│   ├── editor/
│   ├── buffer/
│   ├── view/
│   ├── input/
│   ├── render/
│   ├── files/
│   ├── search/
│   ├── history/
│   ├── config/
│   ├── commands/
│   └── plugins/
├── internal/app/
├── examples/plugins/wordcount/   # reference plugin
├── testdata/
└── README.md


⸻

11) Testing Strategy
	•	Unit tests for buffer ops, search, history, keymap resolution.
	•	Golden tests for rendering (string snapshots of screen buffer).
	•	Integration tests:
	•	Open/edit/save flow.
	•	Plugin handshake and command execution (spawn child process).
	•	Performance tests (M9): load & scroll large file; basic timing.

Run all:

go test ./... -run . -v


⸻

12) Developer Workflow (for agents)
	1.	Keep PRs small; each should close or advance a milestone task.
	2.	Write tests first for buffer and commands when practical.
	3.	Document public types and interfaces.
	4.	Log via a minimal logger behind a --debug flag; no noisy stdout in normal runs.
	5.	Add a note to CHANGELOG.md for user-visible changes.

⸻

13) Tasks Backlog
	•	M0: Init module, main.go, tcell setup, clean exit.
	•	M1: File open, viewport, cursor move, status bar.
	•	M2: Gap buffer TextStorage, edit ops, save.
	•	M3: Incremental search & highlight.
	•	M4: Kill/yank; undo/redo v1.
	•	M5: Config loader (YAML), keymap remap.
	•	M6: Multiple buffers; buffer switch.
	•	M7: Contextual command menu UI + registry.
	•	M8: Plugin manager (JSON-RPC stdio) + sample plugin.
	•	M9: Piece table option; perf tests.

⸻

14) Naming & Branding

Use <PROJECT_NAME> for now. Suggestions: germ (growing editor), gnano, minos. Rename cmd/<project> accordingly.

⸻

15) License

MIT (proposed).

⸻

16) Future Ideas
	•	Syntax highlighting (plugin-provided, e.g., tree-sitter via external process).
	•	LSP integration as a plugin (stdio), surfacing actions through the contextual menu.
	•	Macro recording/replay.
	•	Session persistence & MRU lists.
	•	Theming and status line customization.

⸻

Appendix A — Command Catalog (starting set)

Command ID	Title	Default Keys	When (predicate)
editor.quit	Quit	Ctrl+Q	always
file.open	Open File	Ctrl+O	always
file.save	Save	Ctrl+S	buffer.isDirty
edit.insertRune	Insert Character	(typed)	buffer.isEditable
edit.backspace	Backspace	Backspace	cursor.pos>0
edit.delete	Delete	Delete	not at EOF
edit.newline	Newline	Enter	buffer.isEditable
nav.left/right/up/down	Move	arrows	always
search.incremental	Search	Ctrl+W	always
edit.killLine   Cut to End of Line  Ctrl+K  buffer.isEditable
edit.yank       Paste   Ctrl+U/Ctrl+Y  killring.hasData
history.undo	Undo	Ctrl+Z	history.canUndo
history.redo	Redo	Ctrl+Y	history.canRedo
menu.context	Command Menu	F2	always


⸻

How an Agent Should Start
	1.	Implement M0 with tcell: create internal/app/runner.go to own lifecycle.
	2.	Create pkg/buffer/gapbuffer.go and pkg/buffer/storage.go with TextStorage.
	3.	Build minimal pkg/commands with editor.quit.
	4.	Add CI (GitHub Actions) to run go test ./....
	5.	Keep README updated as milestones complete.

⸻

Status & Next Milestones (updated)

This project has moved beyond the early scaffolding and through the first interactive features. Here’s a quick snapshot of what’s done and what’s next.

Completed (high level)
- M0: Scaffold and event loop: terminal init, clean shutdown, basic UI.
- M1: Open/display and navigation: file load, cursor movement, status UI.
- M2: Editing core: gap buffer, insert/delete/newline, save + Save As.
- M3: Search and go-to: incremental highlights, Enter to jump; Alt+G go-to.
- M4: Kill/yank and undo/redo v1: Ctrl+K, Ctrl+U/Ctrl+Y, Ctrl+Z/Ctrl+Y; single-slot kill ring.
- Extras: Help screen (F1/Ctrl+H), dirty-quit confirmation, basic normal/insert/visual modes, logging hooks.

Next Milestones (proposal)
- M5 — Config & Keymaps
  - Tasks: add pkg/config loader (YAML), define keymap structure, remap handlers in internal/app/runner.go via a dispatch table.
  - Files: pkg/config/*, pkg/input/keymap.go (or fold into app), internal/app/runner.go (use keymap), readme.md.
  - Acceptance: user can remap at least save/quit/search; invalid configs fail with a clear status message; unit tests for key resolution.

- M6 — Multiple Buffers & Simple Windowing
  - Tasks: introduce an Editor orchestrator holding buffers; add open-in-new-buffer, buffer switcher, and optional single split.
  - Files: pkg/editor/editor.go, internal/app/runner.go (route to focused buffer), internal/app/*_ui.go (update prompts), tests for focus/render state.
  - Acceptance: open two files, switch focus without data loss; status shows active file; tests assert buffer switching correctness.

- M7 — Contextual Command Menu v1
  - Tasks: pkg/menu with command registry and fuzzy filter; popup UI; wire core commands with names/when-predicates.
  - Files: pkg/menu/*, internal/app/runner.go (F2 handler), pkg/commands (metadata), tests for filtering and execution.
  - Acceptance: pressing F2 shows commands; filtering works; selecting executes the command; smoke tests cover menu flow.

Upcoming (after M7)
- M8 — Plugin API v0: JSON-RPC stdio, minimal capabilities, reference plugin (wordcount/toggle-comment).
- M9 — Quality & Performance: piece table option behind TextStorage, large-file tests and thresholds, profiling.

Notes
- The existing UI already includes open/save prompts, search/go-to, and quit confirmation; the plan above focuses on configurability and multi-buffer ergonomics next.
- Consider consolidating duplicated helpers (drawUI/drawHelp) found in cmd/texteditor and internal/app/runner.go during M5 refactors.

Commit message:

Add basic YAML config and keymap system

readme.md, after:

<TextEditorTest> — A Go CLI Text Editor

A tiny nano-like editor that can grow toward Emacs

Goal: Start with a reliable, minimalist, cross-platform terminal editor (nano clone), then expand toward Emacs-style power via a contextual command menu and a plug-in system.

Parallelization Plan
--------------------
To keep the editor responsive as features grow, we will split work between a
single sequential core and multiple background goroutines.

Sequential core (single goroutine)
- Maintains the edit log and undo/redo history in order.
- Owns cursor position and selection state.
- Applies all edits and command dispatch so changes occur deterministically.

Concurrent subsystems (worker goroutines)
- Rendering, file I/O, search/indexing, plug‑in host, and other background
  analysis.
- Workers communicate with the core through typed channels and operate on
  snapshots of editor state. They never mutate core state directly.

Integration guidelines
- Offload long‑running tasks to workers and report results back as commands.
- Keep data structures copy‑on‑write or immutable when shared across threads.
- Log every edit through the sequential core to preserve ordering for future
  replay or collaboration features.

This approach lets most of the application run in parallel while guaranteeing
that the edit history and cursor/selection remain consistent.

⸻

0) Quick Start (for the coding agent)
	•	Language: Go 1.22+
	•	Terminal UI: Prefer tcell (github.com/gdamore/tcell/v2) for cross-platform input/rendering.
	•	Build:

go build ./cmd/<project>


	•	Run:

./<project> [path/to/file]


	•	Test:

go test ./...



⸻

Example: Build & basic usage

Build the editor binary from the repository root:

    go build ./cmd/texteditor

This produces a binary named `texteditor` in the working directory. Run it with an optional file path:

    ./texteditor [path/to/file]

Interactive example (typical session):

- Open a file:

    ./texteditor README.md

 - Move the cursor with the arrow keys (or Ctrl+B/F/P/N), PageUp/PageDown, Home/End.
- Search (incremental): press Ctrl+W, type a query — matches are highlighted in the viewport as you type; press Enter to jump to the current match, Esc to cancel.
- Go to line: press Alt+G, enter a 1-based line number, press Enter to jump.
- Save changes: press Ctrl+S.
- Quit: press Ctrl+Q (the editor will prompt if the buffer is dirty in future milestones).

Notes:
- Search highlights and go-to behavior are implemented in M3. Highlight styles use a high-contrast background for visibility; theming and color configuration come later (M5).

⸻

1) Project Phases & Milestones

We’ll ship in small, testable increments. Each milestone has acceptance criteria.

M0 — Scaffold & Event Loop
	•	Create module, folders (see Structure).
	•	Initialize terminal (raw mode), main loop, clean shutdown on Ctrl+Q.
	•	Render a static screen and status bar; show current file name or [No File].
Done when: App starts, draws a status bar, exits cleanly on Ctrl+Q; unit test covers event loop tick handler.

M1 — Open/Display & Basic Navigation (nano parity, read-only)
	•	Load small/medium files into a text buffer.
	•	Display with scrolling; handle cursor movement: arrows, PageUp/Down, Home/End.
	•	Status line shows: filename, cursor line:col, modification flag.
Done when: Can open a file and navigate end-to-end without editing; tests cover file load and viewport math.

M2 — Editing Core (insert, delete, newlines)
	•	Implement TextStorage interface and start with a gap buffer (simple and fast enough).
	•	Insert characters, Backspace/Delete, Enter (LF newlines).
	•	Mark buffer “dirty”; enable Ctrl+S to save.
Done when: Can edit text, save to disk, reopen and see changes; tests cover insert/delete correctness.

M3 — Search (incremental) & Go-to
	•	Ctrl+W: incremental search UI with highlights; Enter to jump; Esc to cancel.
	•	Ctrl+_ (or Alt+G): go-to line.
Done when: Search works across file; tests cover search index and wrap-around.

M4 — Clipboard-like actions (line kill/yank) & Undo/Redo v1
		•	Ctrl+K: cut to end of line to an internal kill ring (single slot is fine for v1).
		•	Ctrl+U/Ctrl+Y: paste line.
		•	p: paste from the kill ring in normal mode.
		•	Ctrl+Z/Ctrl+Y: undo/redo using a simple history stack.
Done when: Basic cut/paste and undo/redo function with tests on edit history.

M5 — Config & Keymaps
	•	Read ~/.<project>/config.(yaml|toml) for settings: theme, keybindings.
	•	Keymap system maps sequences to commands.
Done when: Users can remap a key (e.g., save); tests on key resolution.

M6 — Multiple Buffers & Simple Windowing
	•	Open multiple files in memory; switch buffers; optional horizontal/vertical split (one level).
Done when: Open two files and flip focus; tests assert buffer focus and rendering state.

M7 — Contextual Command Menu (foundation for “M-x” feel)
	•	Key: F2 (or Alt+X) opens a popup “command palette”.
	•	Filter by fuzzy match; show context-valid commands (see Context Model).
Done when: Core commands appear, are filterable, and execute; tests cover menu filtering.

M8 — Plug-in API v0 (external process, JSON-RPC over stdio)
	•	Define minimal RPC: Register, ListCommands, Execute.
	•	Provide editor capabilities via Context: buffer text slice, selection, cursor, file path, filetype.
	•	Ship one reference plug-in (e.g., word count) in Go or Python.
Done when: Plugin registers commands visible in the contextual menu and can mutate the buffer via RPC; end-to-end test with a sample plug-in.

M9 — Quality Pass & Large Files
	•	Swap gapbuffer behind TextStorage with a piece table implementation (flag-gated).
	•	Add basic performance tests with a ~5–20MB file.
Done when: Large files remain responsive within reasonable limits (document thresholds in README).

⸻

2) Non-Goals (early)
	•	Full Emacs parity (modes, elisp) — out of scope early.
	•	Mouse support — optional later.
	•	Binary diff/merge tools — later.
	•	Windows console “legacy mode” quirks — best effort; keep tcell default paths.

⸻

3) Architecture Overview

Core Packages (proposed)

cmd/<project>/        # main entry
internal/app/         # bootstrap, DI wiring (internal vis)
pkg/editor/           # Editor orchestrator, lifecycle
pkg/buffer/           # TextStorage interface + gapbuffer, piecetable
pkg/view/             # Viewport, status bar, popups
pkg/input/            # Key handling, keymap, chords
pkg/render/           # Drawing via tcell
pkg/files/            # I/O, encodings, line endings
pkg/search/           # Incremental search
pkg/history/          # Undo/Redo
pkg/config/           # Config load/validate
pkg/commands/         # Built-in commands
pkg/menu/             # Contextual command menu
pkg/plugins/          # Plugin manager, JSON-RPC transport, capability guards

Key Data Structures
	•	Editor: holds Buffers, focused Window, Keymap, Config, PluginManager.
	•	Buffer: wraps TextStorage, Cursor, Selection, Dirty flag, FilePath, FileType.
	•	TextStorage (interface):

type TextStorage interface {
    Insert(pos int, s []rune) error
    Delete(start, end int) error
    Slice(start, end int) []rune
    Len() int
    LineAt(idx int) (start, end int)
}


	•	Context (passed to commands/plugins):

type Context struct {
    BufferID   string
    FilePath   string
    FileType   string
    Cursor     Position
    Selection  *Range // nil if none
    ReadOnly   bool
    // Editor services (capability-limited in plugins):
    GetText(start, end int) (string, error)
    Replace(start, end int, with string) error
    Insert(pos int, s string) error
    Message(msg string)
}



Command Model
	•	Commands are functions with signature:
func(ctx *Context, args map[string]any) error
	•	Registered in a catalog with:
	•	Name (id), Title (for UI), When predicate (context applicability), Category, DefaultKeybinds.

⸻

4) Contextual Command Menu (v1)
	•	Trigger: F2 (or Alt+X).
	•	Shows a list of applicable commands from Core + Plugins.
	•	Input supports fuzzy filtering; Enter executes selected command.
	•	Context passed includes FileType (to enable language-aware commands), Selection, Cursor.
	•	UI: popup panel centered; help line shows keybinding for selected item.

Extension later: categories/tabs, preview pane, and per-mode menus.

⸻

5) Plug-in System (Path to Power)

Design Choice

Use out-of-process plugins communicating via JSON-RPC 2.0 over stdio (or pipes).
Why:
	•	Portable across platforms and architectures.
	•	Safer: crash/isolate; no Go plugin ABI issues.
	•	Language-agnostic; authors can use Go/Python/Rust/…

Transport
	•	Editor spawns plugin executable listed in config.
	•	Handshake:
	•	Editor → Plugin: Register (editor version, capabilities).
	•	Plugin → Editor: declares commands[] with metadata.
	•	Runtime:
	•	Editor → Plugin: Execute with Context and args.
	•	Plugin → Editor: ApplyEdits / PostMessage via RPC callbacks.

Minimal RPC (v0)

// Editor -> Plugin
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"Register", "params":{"editorVersion":"0.1.0"}, "id":1 }
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"ListCommands", "id":2 }
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"Execute",
  "params":{"name":"word.count","context":{...},"args":{}}, "id":3 }

// Plugin -> Editor (callback)
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"ApplyEdits",
  "params":{"bufferId":"...","edits":[{"start":10,"end":20,"text":"X"}]} }
{ "jsonrpc":"2.0", "method":"PostMessage", "params":{"text":"Done."} }

Security & Sandboxing (initial stance)
	•	Default deny: plugins cannot read files or environment via the editor.
	•	Editor exposes only text operations and messages by default.
	•	Opt-in capabilities later (e.g., filesystem, spawn processes) via config flags.

Reference Plugin (for milestone M8)
	•	wordcount (read-only), then toggle-comment (mutating) for Go/JSON.

⸻

6) Keybindings (nano-like defaults)
		•	Ctrl+Q: Quit (prompt if dirty)
		•	Ctrl+S: Save
		•	Ctrl+O: Open file (prompt)
		•	Ctrl+W: Search (incremental)
		•	Ctrl+K: Cut to end of line
		•	Ctrl+U/Ctrl+Y: Paste (yank)
		•	Ctrl+Z / Ctrl+Y: Undo / Redo
		•	Ctrl+A/Ctrl+E: Line start/end (insert)
		•	F2: Contextual Command Menu
(Remappable in config at M5.)

⸻

7) Config

File: ~/.<project>/config.yaml (or local .editorconfig.yaml in project root)

theme: "default"
keymap:
  "Ctrl+Q": "editor.quit"
  "Ctrl+S": "file.save"
  "F2":     "menu.context"
plugins:
  - path: "/usr/local/bin/<project>-wordcount"
    enabled: true
    capabilities: ["read"]


⸻

8) File Handling
	•	Default newline: \n (preserve existing when possible).
	•	UTF-8 only v1; detect BOM and drop on write unless present on read.
	•	Large files: start with in-memory; document practical limits; add piece table in M9.

⸻

9) Building Blocks & Decisions
	•	Terminal lib: tcell for input/render; fall back plan: termbox if needed.
	•	Text storage: Start gap buffer behind TextStorage; plan swap to piece table.
	•	Search: naive forward scan with highlights; optimize later with indexes.
	•	Undo/Redo: command log with coalescing for typed runs; cap history size.

⸻

10) Directory Structure (initial)

.
├── cmd/<project>/main.go
├── pkg/
│   ├── editor/
│   ├── buffer/
│   ├── view/
│   ├── input/
│   ├── render/
│   ├── files/
│   ├── search/
│   ├── history/
│   ├── config/
│   ├── commands/
│   └── plugins/
├── internal/app/
├── examples/plugins/wordcount/   # reference plugin
├── testdata/
└── README.md


⸻

11) Testing Strategy
	•	Unit tests for buffer ops, search, history, keymap resolution.
	•	Golden tests for rendering (string snapshots of screen buffer).
	•	Integration tests:
	•	Open/edit/save flow.
	•	Plugin handshake and command execution (spawn child process).
	•	Performance tests (M9): load & scroll large file; basic timing.

Run all:

go test ./... -run . -v


⸻

12) Developer Workflow (for agents)
	1.	Keep PRs small; each should close or advance a milestone task.
	2.	Write tests first for buffer and commands when practical.
	3.	Document public types and interfaces.
	4.	Log via a minimal logger behind a --debug flag; no noisy stdout in normal runs.
	5.	Add a note to CHANGELOG.md for user-visible changes.

⸻

13) Tasks Backlog
	•	M0: Init module, main.go, tcell setup, clean exit.
	•	M1: File open, viewport, cursor move, status bar.
	•	M2: Gap buffer TextStorage, edit ops, save.
	•	M3: Incremental search & highlight.
	•	M4: Kill/yank; undo/redo v1.
	•	M5: Config loader (YAML), keymap remap.
	•	M6: Multiple buffers; buffer switch.
	•	M7: Contextual command menu UI + registry.
	•	M8: Plugin manager (JSON-RPC stdio) + sample plugin.
	•	M9: Piece table option; perf tests.

⸻

14) Naming & Branding

Use <PROJECT_NAME> for now. Suggestions: germ (growing editor), gnano, minos. Rename cmd/<project> accordingly.

⸻

15) License

MIT (proposed).

⸻

16) Future Ideas
	•	Syntax highlighting (plugin-provided, e.g., tree-sitter via external process).
	•	LSP integration as a plugin (stdio), surfacing actions through the contextual menu.
	•	Macro recording/replay.
	•	Session persistence & MRU lists.
	•	Theming and status line customization.

⸻

Appendix A — Command Catalog (starting set)

Command ID	Title	Default Keys	When (predicate)
editor.quit	Quit	Ctrl+Q	always
file.open	Open File	Ctrl+O	always
file.save	Save	Ctrl+S	buffer.isDirty
edit.insertRune	Insert Character	(typed)	buffer.isEditable
edit.backspace	Backspace	Backspace	cursor.pos>0
edit.delete	Delete	Delete	not at EOF
edit.newline	Newline	Enter	buffer.isEditable
nav.left/right/up/down	Move	arrows	always
search.incremental	Search	Ctrl+W	always
edit.killLine   Cut to End of Line  Ctrl+K  buffer.isEditable
edit.yank       Paste   Ctrl+U/Ctrl+Y  killring.hasData
history.undo	Undo	Ctrl+Z	history.canUndo
history.redo	Redo	Ctrl+Y	history.canRedo
menu.context	Command Menu	F2	always


⸻

How an Agent Should Start
	1.	Implement M0 with tcell: create internal/app/runner.go to own lifecycle.
	2.	Create pkg/buffer/gapbuffer.go and pkg/buffer/storage.go with TextStorage.
	3.	Build minimal pkg/commands with editor.quit.
	4.	Add CI (GitHub Actions) to run go test ./....
	5.	Keep README updated as milestones complete.

⸻

Status & Next Milestones (updated)

This project has moved beyond the early scaffolding and through the first interactive features. Here’s a quick snapshot of what’s done and what’s next.

Completed (high level)
- M0: Scaffold and event loop: terminal init, clean shutdown, basic UI.
- M1: Open/display and navigation: file load, cursor movement, status UI.
- M2: Editing core: gap buffer, insert/delete/newline, save + Save As.
- M3: Search and go-to: incremental highlights, Enter to jump; Alt+G go-to.
- M4: Kill/yank and undo/redo v1: Ctrl+K, Ctrl+U/Ctrl+Y, Ctrl+Z/Ctrl+Y; single-slot kill ring.
- Extras: Help screen (F1/Ctrl+H), dirty-quit confirmation, basic normal/insert/visual modes, logging hooks.
- M5: Config and keymaps: load ~/.texteditor/config.yaml to remap quit/save/search.

Next Milestones (proposal)
- M6 — Multiple Buffers & Simple Windowing
  - Tasks: introduce an Editor orchestrator holding buffers; add open-in-new-buffer, buffer switcher, and optional single split.
  - Files: pkg/editor/editor.go, internal/app/runner.go (route to focused buffer), internal/app/*_ui.go (update prompts), tests for focus/render state.
  - Acceptance: open two files, switch focus without data loss; status shows active file; tests assert buffer switching correctness.

- M7 — Contextual Command Menu v1
  - Tasks: pkg/menu with command registry and fuzzy filter; popup UI; wire core commands with names/when-predicates.
  - Files: pkg/menu/*, internal/app/runner.go (F2 handler), pkg/commands (metadata), tests for filtering and execution.
  - Acceptance: pressing F2 shows commands; filtering works; selecting executes the command; smoke tests cover menu flow.

Upcoming (after M7)
- M8 — Plugin API v0: JSON-RPC stdio, minimal capabilities, reference plugin (wordcount/toggle-comment).
- M9 — Quality & Performance: piece table option behind TextStorage, large-file tests and thresholds, profiling.

Notes
- The existing UI already includes open/save prompts, search/go-to, and quit confirmation; the plan above focuses on configurability and multi-buffer ergonomics next.
- Consider consolidating duplicated helpers (drawUI/drawHelp) found in cmd/texteditor and internal/app/runner.go during M5 refactors.
